\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename miditext.info
@settitle miditext
@documentencoding US-ASCII
@comment %**end-of-header

@dircategory music
@direntry
* miditext: (miditext.info). Convert a MIDI file to a text file.
@end direntry

@comment @documentlanguage en_US

@titlepage
@title Using @command{miditext}
@subtitle The MIDI-to-textmidi translator
@author Thomas E. Janzen
@end titlepage
@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2023 Thomas E. Janzen.
@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying
@insertcopying
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top miditext

@end ifnottex
@contents

@menu
* Overview::
* Invoking miditext::
* Installation::
* Testing::
* Known Bugs::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Bibliography::
* Concept Index::
@end menu
@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex overview
The @command{miditext} program translates a binary standard MIDI file into
a text file in textmidi language.
A file in textmidi language can be edited and processed with 
text tools and macro
processors such as m4.  Textmidi files can then be re-translated
into MIDI using @command{textmidi}.  The goal of @command{miditext}
and @command{textmidi} together is to permit the specification of
any musical events that are permitted by the MIDI 1.1 spec's chapter
on Standard MIDI Files.  SysEx (system exclusive) is also supported,
as are all three filetypes (single track, multitrack and multi-sequence).

The textmidi language is described in the info page for @command{textmidi}.

The programs @command{textmidi} and @command{miditext} are not
written to interpret poorly-formed standard MIDI files, that is,
files that do not follow the MIDI 1.1 Spec.
Nevertheless, although at least one popular multimedia program from decades ago
wrote illegal key signature events, with only a byte for the
number of sharps or flats, but no mode (major/minor) byte,
@command{miditext} will accept this idiosyncrasy.

No attempt is made in textmidi to support either MIDI show control 
or machine control.
@menu
* What is miditext?::
* History::
@end menu

@node What is miditext?
@section What is miditext?
@cindex miditext
The program @command{miditext} reads a standard
MIDI file and converts it to a text file, which is in the textmidi language.
Each item in the text file corresponds to an item in the binary MIDI file,
more or less.  

@command{miditext} does not record or play over a MIDI interface.

@node History
@section History
@command{miditext} was developed in 2003 and improved in 2020
and 2021 in order to add support for more of the MIDI specification.

@node Invoking miditext
@chapter Invoking miditext
@cindex Invoking miditext
@menu
* Options::
* Invocation Examples::
@end menu

@node Options
@section Options
@cindex Options
@smallexample
miditext [@b{@minus{}i}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}midi}] @var{midi_input_file} @b{@minus{}o}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}textmidi} @var{textmidi_output_file}
[@b{@minus{}a}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}answer}] [@b{@minus{}q}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}quantize} @var{musical_ratio in quotes}] [@b{@minus{}l}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}lazy}] [@b{@minus{}h}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}help}] 
[@b{@minus{}V}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}version}] [@b{@minus{}v}|@b{@minus{}@minus{}verbose}]
@end smallexample

@table @option
@cindex @command{miditext} command line options.
@item -h, --help
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}help  
@cindex @minus{}h
Print the options summary.
@item -v, --verbose
@cindex @minus{}v
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}verbose
Write some informative messages to the screen.  Errors are printed
regardless.
@item -V, --version
@cindex @minus{}V
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}version
Print the version of @command{miditext}.
@item -i, --midi midi_input_file
@cindex @minus{}i 
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}midi
The input file: a MIDI file.
@item -o, --textmidi textmidi_output_file
@cindex @minus{}o
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}textmidi
The output file, in textmidi text language.
@item -q, --quantize num
@cindex @minus{}q
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}quantize
A musical rhythm ratio (in quotes to satisfy most command shells) to use as
the common divisor of all rhythmic durations.  For example
@quotedblleft{}1/16@quotedblright{} would force all durations to be
divisible by a sixteenth-note.
@item -l, --lazy
@cindex @minus{}l
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}lazy
Will attempt to output track data in textmidi's LAZY mode, an abbreviated 
text representation.
@item -a, --answer
@cindex @minus{}a
@cindex @minus{}@minus{}answer
If the output textmidi file already exists, ask before overwriting it.
@end table

@node Invocation Examples
@section Invocation Examples
@cindex  Invocation Examples
@cindex examples
The following command will read the MIDI file prelude.mid and convert
it to the text-based textmidi language.

@smallexample
@command{miditext} --midi prelude.mid --textmidi prelude.txt
@end smallexample

The following converts prelude.mid into prelude.txt, and attempt to
write using the abbreviated LAZY mode representation.
@cindex lazy

@smallexample
@command{miditext} --midi prelude.mid --textmidi prelude.txt --lazy
@end smallexample

The following converts prelude.mid into prelude.txt,
and coerces rhythms to be divisible by a thirty-second note.
If the file prelude.txt exists, the user will be asked whether to 
overwrite it.
@cindex quantize

@smallexample
@command{miditext} --midi prelude.mid --textmidi prelude.txt --quantize @quotedblleft{}1/32@quotedblright{} --answer
@end smallexample

@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex installation
This program was prepared for builds using GNU autoconf tools.
Unpack the archive.  Move to the directory created for the program.
Run the configure script and run make.
@example
./configure
make
@end example
Make yourself superuser (root), or use sudo to run install targets:
@example
make install
make install-info
@end example

@node Testing
@chapter Testing
@cindex testing 
Part of the testing of the conversion utilities @command{miditext}
and @command{textmidi} is performed on linux with a script similr to this:

@smallexample
#/usr/bin/env bash
function testmidi
@lbracechar{}
    temporary_directory=$(mktemp -d)
    bn=$(basename $@lbracechar{}1@rbracechar{} .mid)
    ~/me/janzent/miscprog/textmidi/miditext --midi $@lbracechar{}1@rbracechar{} --textmidi $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.txt
    sed -i -f ~/me/janzent/sed/starttrack.sed $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.txt
    ~/me/janzent/miscprog/textmidi/textmidi --textmidi $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.txt --midi $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.mid
    if [ -s $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.mid ]; then
        echo "new MIDI file is finite length";
    else
        echo "new MIDI file is either absent or zero length";
    fi
    ~/me/janzent/miscprog/textmidi/miditext --midi $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.mid --textmidi $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}_B.txt
    sed -i -f ~/me/janzent/sed/starttrack.sed $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}_B.txt
    ls -l $@lbracechar{}1@rbracechar{} $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.mid
    diff -s $@lbracechar{}1@rbracechar{} $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.mid 
    diff -q -bBw -s $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}.txt $@lbracechar{}temporary_directory@rbracechar{}/$@lbracechar{}bn@rbracechar{}_B.txt 
@rbracechar{}
testmidi $@lbracechar{}BASH_ARGV[0]@rbracechar{}
@end smallexample

This script can be invoked with
@smallexample
./testmidi prelude.mid
@end smallexample
The result is to create a temporary directory and create the files prelude.txt,
@itemize
@item 
prelude.txt
@item 
prelude.mid
@item 
prelude_B.txt
@end itemize
The original MIDI file and the temporary prelude.mid are compared.
The two textmidi text files are compared.
The test set consists of 6340 classical music files.
64 MIDI files were put aside after having prompting error messages from
an independent scoring program.
The remaining 6276 files all compare
the text files as identical, and about a third of the pairs of
MIDI files compare as identical.  The differences between MIDI files
are still being investigated, but causes known so far include the 
following:
@itemize
@item
Some of the imported MIDI files did not use running status,
in which voice-channel events can drop the command byte if
the command and channel are the same in consecutive voice-channel events.
@command{textmidi} always uses running status.
Running status as used by @command{textmidi} is marked undefined
at the beginning of each track, and set by the first voice-channel event.
From then to the end of the track, running status is set only by
voice-channel events.  It is not reset by non-voice-channel events,
including Channel Change.
Voice-Channel events are one of:
@itemize
@item
Channel Pressure
@item
Note On
@item
Note Off
@item
Polyphonic Key Pressure
@item
Pitch Bend
@item
Program Change
@item
Control Change (including omni/poly on/off)
@end itemize
@item
In text events (including TRACK, INSTRUMENT, COPYRIGHT, etc.)
@command{miditext} drops both prefacing and trailing spaces, as well 
as terminating @quotedblleft{}nul@quotedblright{} (a character with a numeric value of zero) bytes.
Therefore, TEXT events in the round-trip, recreated MIDI file may
differ from those in the original MIDI file.
@item
@command{miditext} recognizes the short key signature event,
but @command{textmidi} always creates the standard event with five total bytes:
(0xFF, 0x59, 2, sharps/flats, mode).
@end itemize

@node Known Bugs
@chapter Known Bugs
@cindex bugs 
Although the DETAIL mode representation should be accurate,
if @minus{}@minus{}lazy is selected, and if a track in the MIDI file has 
overlapping note events with asynchronous start and stop times, the LAZY
mode representation may not be accurate.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@chapter GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.3, 3 November 2008
Copyright @copyright{} 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
https://fsf.org/
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@section PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other functional and
useful document free in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective freedom
to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either commercially or non-
commercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for modifications
made by others.
This License is a kind of “copyleft”, which means that derivative works of the document
must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU General Public
License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software, because
free software needs free documentation: a free program should come with manuals
providing the same freedoms that the software does. But this License is not limited to
software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book. We recommend this License principally for
works whose purpose is instruction or reference.
@section APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms
of this License. Such a notice grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in
duration, to use that work under the conditions stated herein.
The “Document”,
below, refers to any such manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and
is addressed as “you”. You accept the license if you copy, modify or distribute the work
in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
A “Modified Version” of the Document means any work containing the Document or
a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or translated into
another language.
A “Secondary Section” is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the Document
that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or authors of the Document
to the Document’s overall subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that
could fall directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The
relationship could be a matter of historical connection with the subject or with related
matters, or of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.
The “Invariant Sections” are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as
being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the Document is released
under this License. If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is
not allowed to be designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant
Sections. If the Document does not identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.
The “Cover Texts” are certain short passages of text that are listed, as Front-Cover
Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is released under
this License. A Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may
be at most 25 words.
A “Transparent” copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented
in a format whose specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for
revising the document straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images com-
posed of pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing
editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to
a variety of formats suitable for input to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise
Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to
thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent. An image
format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy that is
not “Transparent” is called “Opaque”.
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without
markup, Texinfo input format, LaTEX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly
available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed
for human modification. Examples of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF
and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be read and edited
only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or pro-
cessing tools are not generally available, and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript
or PDF produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
The “Title Page” means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such following
pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires to appear in the
title page. For works in formats which do not have any title page as such, “Title Page”
means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work’s title, preceding the
beginning of the body of the text.
The “publisher” means any person or entity that distributes copies of the Document
to the public.
A section “Entitled XYZ” means a named subunit of the Document whose title either
is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in
another language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such
as “Acknowledgements”, “Dedications”, “Endorsements”, or “History”.) To “Preserve
the Title” of such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a
section “Entitled XYZ” according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states that
this License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to
be included by reference in this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties:
any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no
effect on the meaning of this License.
@section VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or
noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the license
notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and
that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies
you make or distribute. However, you may accept compensation in exchange for copies.
If you distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow the conditions
in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly
display copies.
@section COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed covers) of
the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document’s license notice requires
Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all
these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher
of these copies. The front cover must present the full title with all words of the title
equally prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the
Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other
respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put
the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the
rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque
copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-network location from which
the general network-using public has access to download using public-standard network
protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If
you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will
remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one year after the last time
you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that
edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well
before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to provide you
with an updated version of the Document.
@section MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the conditions
of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely
this License, with the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing
distribution and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of
it. In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:
A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the
Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if there were any,
be listed in the History section of the Document). You may use the same title as
a previous version if the original publisher of that version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible for
authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with at least five
of the principal authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer
than five), unless they release you from this requirement.
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version, as the
publisher.
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other
copyright notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving the public
permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the form
shown in the Addendum below.
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required Cover
Texts given in the Document’s license notice.
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
I. Preserve the section Entitled “History”, Preserve its Title, and add to it an item
stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modified Version
as given on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled “History” in the Docu-
ment, create one stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document
as given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as
stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public access to
a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given in
the Document for previous versions it was based on. These may be placed in the
“History” section. You may omit a network location for a work that was published
at least four years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of the
version it refers to gives permission.
K. For any section Entitled “Acknowledgements” or “Dedications”, Preserve the Title
of the section, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of each of the
contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and
in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the
section titles.
M. Delete any section Entitled “Endorsements”. Such a section may not be included
in the Modified Version.
N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled “Endorsements” or to conflict in
title with any Invariant Section.
O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qualify
as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document, you may at
your option designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add their
titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version’s license notice. These
titles must be distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled “Endorsements”, provided it contains nothing but
endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties—for example, statements of
peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization as the authoritative
definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up
to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified
Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be
added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or by arrangement
made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but
you may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the previous publisher that
added the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permission
to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified
Version.
@section COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License,
under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that you
include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents,
unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license
notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple identical
Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invariant
Sections with the same name but different contents, make the title of each such section
unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or
publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number. Make the same adjustment
to the section titles in the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined
work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled “History” in the vari-
ous original documents, forming one section Entitled “History”; likewise combine any
sections Entitled “Acknowledgements”, and any sections Entitled “Dedications”. You
must delete all sections Entitled “Endorsements.”
@section COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released
under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various
documents with a single copy that is included in the collection, provided that you
follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in all
other respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individu-
ally under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into the extracted
document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of
that document.
@section AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and independent
documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called
an “aggregate” if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the
legal rights of the compilation’s users beyond what the individual works permit. When
the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply to the other
works in the aggregate which are not themselves derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document,
then if the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document’s Cover
Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they
must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggregate.
@section TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute translations
of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with
translations requires special permission from their copyright holders, but you may
include translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions
of these Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this License, and all the
license notices in the Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you
also include the original English version of this License and the original versions of
those notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the translation and
the original version of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will
prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled “Acknowledgements”, “Dedications”, or “His-
tory”, the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require
changing the actual title.
@section TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as expressly
provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or
distribute it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license from a particular
copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder
explicitly and finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to 60 days
after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated permanently if
the copyright holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the
first time you have received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that
copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the licenses of parties
who have received copies or rights from you under this License. If your rights have
been terminated and not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all of the
same material does not give you any rights to use it.
@section FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free
Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit
to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
See https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document
specifies that a particular numbered version of this License “or any later version”
applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that
specified version or of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by
the Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free
Software Foundation. If the Document specifies that a proxy can decide which future
versions of this License can be used, that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of a
version permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.
@section RELICENSING
“Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site” (or “MMC Site”) means any World Wide
Web server that publishes copyrightable works and also provides prominent facilities
for anybody to edit those works. A public wiki that anybody can edit is an example of
such a server. A “Massive Multiauthor Collaboration” (or “MMC”) contained in the
site means any set of copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.
“CC-BY-SA” means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 license pub-
lished by Creative Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit corporation with a principal
place of business in San Francisco, California, as well as future copyleft versions of that
license published by that same organization.
“Incorporate” means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in part, as part
of another Document.
An MMC is “eligible for relicensing” if it is licensed under this License, and if all works
that were first published under this License somewhere other than this MMC, and
subsequently incorporated in whole or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts
or invariant sections, and (2) were thus incorporated prior to November 1, 2008.
The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC contained in the site under
CC-BY-SA on the same site at any time before August 1, 2009, provided the MMC is
eligible for relicensing.
@section How to use this License for your documents
To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the License in the
document and put the following copyright and license notices just after the title page:
Copyright (C)
year
your name.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts, replace the
“with. . . Texts.” line with this:
with the Invariant Sections being list their titles, with
the Front-Cover Texts being list, and with the Back-Cover Texts
being list.
If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other combination of the
three, merge those two alternatives to suit the situation.
If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend releasing
these examples in parallel under your choice of free software license, such as the GNU
General Public License, to permit their use in free software.
 

@node Bibliography
@chapter Bibliography

@itemize
@item @cite{
The Complete MIDI 1.0 Detailed Specification.}
Document version 96.1.
Second edition.
1995.
Los Angeles.
The MIDI Manufacturers Association.

@end itemize

@node Concept Index
@chapter Concept Index
@printindex cp

@bye
