These files are the textmidi-language files for the Piano Quintet Op. 44 by
Robert Schumann, written in 1842.  These files were written by Thomas E. Janzen
in about 2003 and following using the first version of the textmidi program.
This quintet rendering was coached by Massachusetts violist and string
instructor Jenny Stirling.

The base source files were written using the m4 macro preprocessor, hence
filenames that end in ".m4".  Using m4 made it possible to write such
verbosities as trills and swells/fades on a note in a simpler way in the track
files.

Each instrument (violin 1, violin 2, viola, cello, and piano) has its own m4
track file.  In addition, there are 2 to 4 files for the piano, for left-hand,
right-hand, pedal, and sometimes and additional track.  The additional
track was needed because 20 years ago the textmidi program did not
support asynchronous (overlapping notes) chords.

The makefile turns these m4 track files into *.txt track files and concatenates
the text files so that each of the four movements of the quintet becomes its
own single ".txt" file.  The textmidi program can convert each movement's
single text file to a standard 1.1 MIDI file.

Note that some MIDI players do not support either polyphonic or channel
pressure, or support only one of these.  This version of the Quintet uses
Channel Pressure.  The original used Polyphonic Pressure, but correspondents on
the Classical [MIDI] Archive discouraged the use of pressure since their
favorite player did not support it; therefore the version of this Quintet on
classicalarchives.com does not include pressure at all in the second movement
(although Schumann indicated swells and fades).  The version here uses Channel
Pressure.
